1: What is your role in medical student education?

I am fairly new to medical student education and am currently transitioning into the role of OBGYN medical student site director for Banner University Medical Center for the University of Arizona College of Medicine, Phoenix. I was recently at a CME conference where I heard a nationally recognized speaker quip, "Is there anything more useless than a medical student?" to uproarious laughter. My view couldn't be more different. I see medical students as the heroes of the healthcare system, some of the best and brightest among us who have given up more of their youth and vitality than they realize to take on responsibilities that they can barely comprehend in a future that is increasingly uncertain. It is the responsibility of the educator to provide optimal experiences for these young people as they navigate the culture of medicine and daily encounter scenarios that are completely new to them. That involves giving them a humane mix of duties that are just beyond and well within their grasp and as often as possible not way beyond their abilities, nurturing a sense of continual accomplishment so that eventually they will be able to achieve far beyond their current vision of themselves. The educator must also have enough emotional intelligence to recognize and acknowledge when a student is at risk of depression or burnout and normalize the experience of offering and asking for help in such circumstances.

2: What was the inspiration for your presentation topic?

I am basically a software engineer in a physician's body, and throughout my career as a student, resident, rural provider, and now tertiary care hospitalist I have been interested in exploring technical solutions to problems in healthcare and education. It was not until the past few years, however, that I have carved out the time to actually to the work necessary to put forward a solution. That's my background, but the inspiration for this presentation topic and the project behind it came from a variety of sources.

In 2014 I heard Steven Clark speak at the World Symposium of Perinatal Medicine about the benefits of standardization of care within a healthcare organization. That presentation sent me on a whirlwind of thought, mainly regarding the potential of sharing standards between healthcare organizations and health IT systems in much the same way that the open source software movement has encouraged collaboration, modification, reuse, and redistribution of code to the benefit of the broader IT industry.

In 2015 I went to the IteratePHX DevOps conference in Phoenix and again walked away with my head swirling with ideas about the potential of collaboration across the many domains of the healthcare system. DevOps is a movement in the tech industry away from siloes of expertise with minimal overlap to cross-functional teams with shared responsibility for things like development, testing, and deployment of software. Because DevOps engineers have the freedom to understand and help one another with a range of duties, they are able to more quickly identify problems and collaborate on solutions than if they were still working in a heavily siloed environment. Healthcare is just such a heavily siloed environment that could benefit from cooperation and collaboration between IT and clinical personnel, but I found that I was not in a position to influence my system to open up the lines of communication between those domains.

Redirecting my discouragement about the organizational obstacles to cooperation between departments, I decided to turn my attention to a project that I could approach on an individual level. Reappropriating the principles and processes of the open source software movement, I created a simple biomedical reference shared bookmarking service that I called Litsignal. The idea was fairly simple, to enable users to create academic reading lists on different topics and share them with a community that could freely modify and redistribute them. I used it to take notes at CME conferences, preserving the references from each talk, and to organize my personal library of PDF documents. I entered the project in the 2016 AMA Healthier Nation Innovation Challenge but got mixed feedback after making it to the semifinals. Without a meaningful number of users, it languished.

Then Laura Mercer, one of my co-presenters, came to after the APGO conference in January 2017 with some new inspiration. She had read the commentary 'Medical Education Reimagined: a call to action' by Charles Prober of Stanford and Salman Khan of Khan Academy in preparation for one of her sessions and wanted to be a part of creating a platform for sharing curricular resources. I thought the idea was too big at first and almost dismissed it outright, but the more I thought about it the more reasonable it seemed to expand on the system I had already created for sharing references and add the functionality to create and share complete educational modules. We have been working on it ever since and felt it was only appropriate to share it first with APGO conference in January 2018.  

3: What were some of the challenges you faced while developing your program? What was the solution?

The primary challenge facing the independent software developer is finding the time and energy to make the thing. It's not unlike developing a curriculum or preparing a presentation. Time is hard to come by for the full-time physician. Fortunately, there is a vibrant community of open source software contributors, some employed by large corporations and others completely independent, who have created an unspeakably rich ecosystem of software that someone like me can put together in a new combination along with a lot of custom code to make the final product. It still takes time, but what used to be possible only with a large team and expensive infrastructure can now be accomplished by one motivated individual. I have relied on open source projects from the Linux Foundation, Facebook, IBM, Microsoft, and countless other companies and individuals to make Litsignal. I have also had to do a lot of technical problem-based learning and relied on resources like Stack Overflow, Mozilla Developer Network, npm, Medium, and Github to find the answers I need. 



There are other challenges, too, like marketing. Even a free product sells something, an idea that costs users their time and attention, and there can be no community without users. I have too much respect for my colleagues to ask them to use a product that is going to cost them more time than it is going to save. In a value-based environment every decision we make and every partner we choose needs to be a reflection of the limited resources available to provide care to our patients, and there are too many vendors who do not share those values. 

4: What resources did you find the most useful in developing your program (including APGO resources)?



5: What are the one to three things that you hope people who attend your presentation at the Faculty Development Seminar take home with them?